Introduction to Git
===================

# 1 Basic workflow

## 1.1 Version control

* **Version control system** : a tool manages changes made to the files and directories in a project

* **Git** :

    * Nothing that is saved to Git is ever lost, so you can always go back to see which results were generated by which versions of your programs.

    * Git automatically notifies you when your work conflicts with someone else's, so it's harder (but not impossible) to accidentally overwrite work.

    * Git can synchronize work done by different people on different machines, so it scales as your team does.

## 1.2 Where does Git store information?

* **Git project has two parts, called a repository**

	* The files and directories that you create and edit directly
	* The extra information that Git records about the project's history.
		* Git stores in a directory called `.git` located in the root directory of the repository
		* Git expects this information to be laid out in a very precise way, so you should never edit or delete anything in `.git`.

* **Check the state of a repository**

	* `git status`: displays a list of the files that have been modified since the last time changes were saved

## 1.3 How can I tell what I have changed?

* **Staging area**
	* It stores files with changes you want to save that haven't been saved yet
	* You can add more things to the staging area, but once commited you can't make further changes
	* `git status`: show you which files are in this staging area, and which files have changes that haven't yet been put there.

* **What is in a diff**
	* A diff is a formatted display of the differences between two sets of files.
	* `git diff`: show you all the changes in your repository
	* `git diff directory`: show you the changes to the files in some directory

* **Commit changes to a Git repository in two steps:**
	* Add one or more files to the staging area: `git add report.txt`
	* Commit everything in the staging area

```
$ cd dental
$ git add report.txt
$ git status
On branch master
Changes to be committed:
  (use "git reset HEAD <file>..." to unstage)

        modified:   report.txt
```

* **Compare the state of your files with those in the staging area**

	* `git diff -r HEAD`
		* `-r` flag: compare to a particular revision
		* `HEAD`: a shortcut meaning "the most recent commit"

	* `git diff -r HEAD path/to/file`

* **Commit changes**

	* `git commit`: save the changes in the staging area
		* open a text editor
		* The lines starting with `#` are comments, and won't be saved
	* `git commit -m "Program appears to have become self-aware."`: You can enter a log message to serve the same purpose as a comment in a program
	* `git commit --amend -m "new message"`: If you accidentally mistype a commit message, you can change it using the --amend flag.

## 1.4 Interlude: how can I edit a file?

* `nano filename`: open filename for editing or create it if it doesn't already exist

	* Ctrl-K: delete a line
	* Ctrl-U: un-delete a line
	* Ctrl-O: save the file
	* Ctrl-X: exit the editor

## 1.5 View a repository's history

* `git log`: view the log of the project's history
	* `commit` line: display a unique ID for the commit called a hash
	* press the space bar to go down a page
	* press the `q` key to quit

* `git log path/to/file`: display only the changes made to the specific file 
	* `git log -2 data/western.csv`: list the last two changes to that file

# 2. Repositories

## 2.1 How does Git store information?

* Git uses a three-level structure for storing information

	* **Commit**: contains metadata such as the author, the commit message, and the time the commit happened.
		* The most recent commit is at the bottom, underneath its parent commits.

	* **Tree**: tracks the names and locations in the repository when that commit happened.

	* **Blob**: contains a compressed snapshot of the contents of the file when the commit happened
		* blob is short for binary large object, which is a SQL database term for "may contain data of any kind"

## 2.2 What is a hash?

* Every commit to a repository has a unique identifier called a hash (since it is generated by running the changes through a pseudo-random number generator called a hash function). 

* This hash is normally written as a 40-character hexadecimal string like `7c35a3ce607a14953f070f0f83b5d74c2296ef93`, but most of the time, you only have to give Git the first 6 or 8 characters in order to identify the commit you mean.

* Hashes are what enable Git to share data efficiently between repositories. If two files are the same, their hashes are guaranteed to be the same. 

## 2.3 How can I view a specific commit?

* `git show` + first few characters of the commit's hash: `git show 0da2f7`

	* `git show HEAD`: refers to the most recent commit
	* `git show HEAD~1`: refers to the commit before the most recent one
	* `git show HEAD~2`: refers to the commit before that, and so on.

* `git annotate file`: show who made the last change to each line of a file and when
	* The first eight digits of the hash
	* The author
	* The time of the commit
	* The line number
	* The contents of the line

* `git diff ID1..ID2`: show the differences between the commits
	* `git diff abc123..def456`
	* `git diff HEAD~1..HEAD~3`

## 2.4 How do I add new files?

```
# show the files that are in your repository but aren't being tracked
$ git status
On branch masterUntracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)

        sources.txt

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)

# add the new file to the staging area
$ git add sources.txt

# save the staged files with the message
$ git commit -m "Starting to track data sources."
```

## 2.5 How do I tell Git to ignore certain files?

* `.gitignore`: create a file in the root directory of your repository, tell git to stop paying attention to files you don't care about

```
build
*.mpl

# ignore any file or directory called `build`
# ignore files ends in `.mpl`
```

## 2.6 How can I remove unwanted files?

* `git clean -n`: show you a list of files that are in the repository, but whose history Git is not currently tracking

* `git clean -f`: delete the files that you don't want

* `git clean`: only works on untracked files


## 2.7 Git configuration?

* `git config --list`: see what the settings are
	* `--system`: (for all users on the computer) settings for every user on this computer
	* `--global`: (per-user) settings for every one of your projects
	* `--local`:(per-project) settings for one specific project

* `git config --global setting value`: change a configuration value
	* user.name
	* user.email `git config --global user.email rep.loop@datacamp.com`

# 3. Undo

## 3.1 How can I commit changes selectively?

* `git add path/to/file`: stage a single file

* `git reset HEAD`: unstage the additions

## 3.2 How do I re-stage files?

* use `git add` periodically to save the most recent changes to a file to the staging area.

## 3.3 How can I undo changes to unstaged files?

* `git checkout -- filename`: discard the changes that have not yet been staged
	* once you discard changes in this way, they are gone forever.

## 3.4 How can I undo changes to staged files?

```
git reset HEAD path/to/file
git checkout -- path/to/file
```

## 3.5 How do I restore an old version of a file?

```
# list the last two changes to that file
$ git log -2 data/western.csv

# restore the version of that file
$ git checkout 29a59811 data/western.csv

# display the updated contents
$ cat data/western.csv

# commit the restored version
$ git commit -m "Adding fresh data for southern and western regions" data/western.csv
```

## 3.6 How can I undo all of the changes I have made?

`git checkout -- .`: revert all files in the current directory.

# 4. Working with branches

## 4.1 What is a branch?

Git supports for creating branches, which allows you to have multiple versions of your work, and lets you track each version systematically.

## 4.2 How can I see what branches my repository has?

* `git branch`: list all of the branches in a repository

* The branch you are currently in will be shown with a `*` beside its name

* By default, every Git repository has a branch called `master`

## 4.3 How can I view the differences between branches?

* `git diff branch-1..branch-2`: show the difference between two branches

## 4.4 How can I switch from one branch to another?

* `git checkout branch`: switch to that branch

* `git rm`: remove the file

```
# go into dental repository
$ cd dental

# show the branches
$ git branch
  alter-report-title
  * master
  summary-statistics
  
# switch to the other branch
$ git checkout summary-statistics
Switched to branch 'summary-statistics'

# delete file
$ git rm report.txt
rm 'report.txt'

# commit your change with message
$ git commit -m "Removing report"
[summary-statistics 30142e7] Removing report
 1 file changed, 7 deletions(-)
 delete mode 100644 report.txt
 
# list to check changes
$ ls
bin  data  results

# switch to master branch
$ git checkout master
Switched to branch 'master'

$ ls
bin  data  report.txt  results
```

## 4.5 How can I create a branch?

* `git checkout -b branch-name`: create a branch then switch to it in one step

## 4.6 How can I merge two branches?

* `git merge branch-name branch-name -m "message"`

## 4.7 How can I merge two brances with conflicts?

* `git status`: check if there is a conflict during a merge

* `nano file`: edit the file

# 5. collaborating

## 5.1 How can I create a brand new repository?

* `git init project-name`: create a repository for a new project in the current working directory

* nested repositories: create one Git repository inside another
	* It becomes very complicated very quickly. You should not to do it.

## 5.2 How can I turn an existing project into a Git repository?

* `git init`: convert existing projects into repositories
* `git init /path/to/project`

## 5.3 How can I create a copy of an existing repository?

* `git clone URL`: clone a repository, where `URL` identifies the repository you want to clone

* `git clone /existing/project newprojectname`


## 5.4 How can I find out where a cloned repository originated?

* `git remote`: list the names of its remotes in a repository

* `git remote -v`: shows the remote's URLs

## 5.5 How can I define remotes?

* `git remote add remote-name URL`: add more remotes

* `git remote rm remote-name`: remove existing remotes

## 5.6 How can I pull in changes from a remote repository?

`git pull remote branch`: gets everything in `branch` in the remote repository identified by `remote` and merges it into the current branch of your local repository.

## 5.7 What happens if I try to pull when I have unsaved changes?

```
$ cd dental
$ git pull origin dental
fatal: Couldn't find remote ref dental
fatal: The remote end hung up unexpectedly
$ git checkout -- .
$ git pull
Updating da2604e..0ae302b
Fast-forward
 report.txt | 2 ++
 1 file changed, 2 insertions(+)
```

## 5.8 How can I push my changes to a remote repository?

`git push remote-name branch-name`: pushes the changes you have made locally into a remote repository













