# Chapter 11  Regular expressions

```python
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt') 
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('From:', line):
        print(line)
```

## 11.1 Character matching in regular expressions

```python
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt') 
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('^F..m:', line):
        print(line)
```


## 11.2 Extracting data using regular expressions



## 11.3 Combining searching and extracting


## 11.4 Escape character


## 11.5 Summary


## 11.6 Bonus section for Unix / Linux users


## 11.7 Debugging


## 11.8 Glossary

* **brittle code** Code that works when the input data is in a particular format but is prone to breakage if there is some deviation from the correct format. We call this “brittle code” because it is easily broken.

* **greedy matching** The notion that the + and * characters in a regular expression expand outward to match the largest possible string.

* **grep** A command available in most Unix systems that searches through text files looking for lines that match regular expressions. The command name stands for “Generalized Regular Expression Parser”.

* **regular expression** A language for expressing more complex search strings. A regular expression may contain special characters that indicate that a search only matches at the beginning or end of a line or many other similar capa- bilities.

* **wild card** A special character that matches any character. In regular expressions the wild-card character is the period.


## 11.9 Exercises

**Exercise 1: Write a simple program to simulate the operation of the grep command on Unix. Ask the user to enter a regular expression and count the number of lines that matched the regular expression:**

$ python grep.py    
Enter a regular expression: ^Author    
mbox.txt had 1798 lines that matched ^Author

$ python grep.py    
Enter a regular expression: ^X-    
mbox.txt had 14368 lines that matched ^X-  

$ python grep.py
Enter a regular expression: java$
mbox.txt had 4175 lines that matched java$


**Exercise 2: Write a program to look for lines of the form:**

New Revision: 39772

**Extract the number from each of the lines using a regular expression and the findall() method. Compute the average of the numbers and print out the average as an integer.**

Enter file:mbox.txt   
38549

Enter file:mbox-short.txt    
39756
